Applications of AI in Negotiation
1 Introduction
With the onset of the AI revolution, it’s possible that mediators could have access to vastly
more data about the parties they’re working with, leading to more informed dialogues and
greater positive outcomes. Negotiators can use machine learning (ML) to make better pre-
dictions about parties’ interests when negotiating. However, the limitations of these models
bring into question how much of a benefit they truly offer.
2 Informing Strategy
There are numerous applications of AI at the strategy ideation stage of negotiation, which
may provide mediators with better information or predictions of possible outcomes. With
expedited data processing, these tools can identify key anomalies which may lead to conflict
(Choyal et al., 2024). By considering data from social media and news, as well as potential
economic indicators, early signs of violence are less likely to go unnoticed. This may allow
negotiators to practice a sort of preemption. If they believe it necessary in a certain case,
they may bring parties to a table before a conflict breaks out in order to prevent its start in
the first place.
Historical strategies can be useful in informing present ones due to the benefit of hind-
sight. Being able to comprehend what did or didn’t work prior allows those involved to
revisit former areas of agreement or target areas that are still weak (Choyal et al., 2024).
1This necessity can be seen in the work of Arana-Catania et al., who have been collaborating
with the Yemeni mediation team to build ML models informed by prior discussions between
the parties involved. They predetermined categories and query words which their model
could then use to target dialogue about those specific ideas which, combined with a latent
issue extraction tool, provided mediators with a full understanding of how these parties have
developed. This highlights to them the most contentious issues, helping them focus their
time. It also helped determine the latent issues which could lead to more consensuses.
3 During Negotiation
Most of the benefits of ML to the active negotiation process stem from the natural language
processing (NLP) capabilities of these models. In negotiation, the mediator works to un-
derstand to the best of their ability what the parties are thinking. They use a combination
of verbal and non-verbal (proxemic) cues to make educated guesses about how they may
be reacting to the issue at hand. By employing NLP, the context of the negotiation can
be interpreted by the model, providing it a strong basis to glean reactive cues. Combining
this method with sentiment analysis helps identify points of contention as well as points of
agreement in order to fully understand the subtext of what’s being said.
Negotiations often occur between parties that have difficulty communicating to one an-
other. In our globalized system, language barriers are often faced, especially when conduct-
ing multi-party negotiations or in countries with diverse ethnic and linguistic compositions.
Some of the issues of inter-party negotiation can be mitigated through the live translation
capabilities of NLP (Choyal et al., 2024). Models may have the ability to actively translate
both spoken and written word in real time, more quickly than a translator. Thus, it is
ensured that all parties can fully participate in the negotiation process. For languages that
have deep regional ties, but aren’t widely spoken, there may be difficulty locating a trans-
lator who can help with negotiation. In such cases, reliance on a machine learning model
2could be beneficial to speeding up the process.
4 Public Opinion
An important element of the negotiation process is public opinion surrounding the negoti-
ations. In conflicts where there is higher support for negotiation, the government may feel
more pressure to resolve the conflict as such, rather than seeking a military resolution. In a
study conducted by Montoya et al., civilians in conflict zones were asked if they supported
negotiation as a means to end conflict, alongside a series of potential social, political, and
economic predictors. They determined that one’s level of support for vigilante justice and
extra-judicial policing were good predictors of negotiation preferences, as well as the level of
trust in state institutions and proximity to conflict (Montoya & Tellez, 2020). Interestingly,
one’s level of victimization had little predictive power as to their support for negotiations
(Montoya & Tellez, 2020). Therefore, cultural indicators may provide the best predictor of
public support for negotiation.
5 Limitations and Ethical Concerns
Despite the significant asset that machine learning may prove to offer the field of negotiation,
it is still limited in the scope of benefits it can provide. Furthermore, there are ethical
considerations that must be taken into account, as with any emerging technology.
5.1 Limitations
While NLP models have significantly improved their logic and reasoning skills, there is still
significant room for improvement. Often, NLP models struggle to pass systemic reasoning
tests and make ”inconsistent inferences” about the world around them (Molak, 2025). A
potential solution to this would be Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting, wherein the user
3provides an example of how to solve a problem step-by-step or simply prompts the model
to do so. It’s been found that adding a variation of ”think about this step-by-step” leads to
the generation of more systematic outputs.
AI models may also experience ”hallucinations,” wherein they present false information
as true. This is of great concern to negotiators, who rely on having accurate information
when dealing with parties in contentious situations. The frequency of hallucinations can be
reduced through retrieval augmented generation (RAG), which only pulls information from
provided documents, rather than internal training knowledge. An example of this would
be the models used by Arana-Catania et al., which only used data from the negotiations
provided. Yet, the more information that the model has, the better the analysis will be.
Limited volume has the potential to skew results and misguide the interpretation of that data
(Arana-Catania et al., 2022). Thus for RAG to be an effective solution to hallucinations, it
requires significant data to supplement the its lack of outside training data.
5.2 Ethical Concerns
The ethical concerns of AI in negotiation are multifold. Based on what data was used in
training, there may be a tendency to favor certain groups (Choyal et al., 2024). As such, it’s
important to diversify the datasets being used in this capacity, so they mirror the contexts
in which they’re being used.
Data security is another major concern regarding AI applications in negotiation. The
potential exists for privacy to be infringed upon, especially in cases where AI is being used
in a monitoring context (Choyal et al., 2024). To solve this, it’s important to include privacy
measures, such as data anonymization, and consent mechanisms into the analytic methods
of ML models.
If in the wrong hands, these models have the potential to spread disinformation or result
in targeted attacks of individuals or groups (Choyal et al., 2024). What is yet to happen in
the field of AI is to build a strict international framework around its use, like we have with
4other emerging technologies that have great potential for both good and bad. Applying an
appropriate regulatory framework may even stimulate innovation due to the stability that it
would provide (Mariyono & Hidayatullah, 2025).
6 Discussion
ML has the opportunity to be incredibly beneficial to negotiation, especially in the era of
protracted, intrastate conflict which we have today. There are large datasets on which to
train negotiation models and due to their regional concentrations, any supplemental data
provided can be well focused. The translation capabilities of NLP would be useful to allow for
more effective dialogue between mediators and parties. However, there are still immense lim-
itations and ethical concerns that need to be addressed before AI becomes more widespread
in its use. Hallucination is concerning, especially when acting under the assumption that
people tend to over-extend their trust to these tools. Additionally, without a cohesive legal
framework under which countries are allowed to use ML, these tools will likely end up being
used beyond their intended purposes. It’s important that there is a structure in place to
regulate AI tools before they are used widespread, so it is clear who is accountable for the
decisions made by the model, especially if they end up misstepping.
7 Conclusion
There is a lot of fear being expressed about the integration of AI in conflict resolution, just as
much as there is interest in its use. However, one thing is clear: our traditional operational
methods are changing and it’s important to be able to adapt to them. Further work needs to
be done to streamline our models for negotiations, resolving some of the outstanding issues
they face and ethical concerns need to be addressed. If that happens, there is potential for
a great asset to be provided to negotiation methods.
5References
Arana-Catania, M., van Lier, F.-A., & Procter, R. (2022). Supporting peace negotiations in
the yemen war through machine learning.Cambridge University Press.
Aydo˘ gan, R., Baarslag, T., & Gerding, E. (2021). Artificial intelligence techniques for conflict
resolution.Group Decision and Negotiation.
Choyal, P., Mishra, P., Sharma, J., & Chaturvedi, A. (2024). Navigating peace: Harnessing
artificial intelligence for conflict resolution.International Research Journal of Mod-
ernization in Engineering Technology and Science.
Mariyono, D., & Hidayatullah, A. A. (2025). Quantifying ai’s role in conflict resolution: As-
sessing its potency in mediation and peacekeeping.Dirasat: Human Social Sciences.
Molak, A. (2025). Ai in conflict resolution: Practical considerations, opportunities and chal-
lenges.Conflict Resolution QUarterly.
Montoya, A. M., & Tellez, J. (2020). Who wants peace? predicting civilian prefences in
conflict negotiations.Journal of Politics in Latin America.
Pauwels, E. (2020). Artificial intelligence and data capture technologies in violence and
conflict prevention: Opportunities and challenges for the international community.
Global Center on Cooperative Security.
6