Steps Forward for Sudan 
 
The Munich Security Conference this past week o Ưered some interesting insights into 
some large foreign policy issues. I watched a two-part talk about the Sudanese Civil War, 
which brought up some valuable considerations. The talk consisted of a moderated 
discussion with PM Kamil Idris of Sudan and a panel made up of US Senior Advisor Boulos, 
the British and German Foreign Secretaries, and a youth activist from Port Sudan. Here are 
my main takeaways: 
 
 
PM Kamil Idris (left) at the Munich Security Conference, Feb 2026 
1. The SAF cannot or is unwilling to directly identify their opposition.  
When PM Idris was asked whether his government had been in communication with the 
RSF, he denied their existence, referring to their o Ưicial disillusion in 2023, even though the 
group continues to operate today. While this may be a political ploy for Idris, who is in 
eƯect not giving the RSF the power of recognition, it also may be counterintuitive to 
negotiation. If the RSF’s frustrations originated in the fact that they were second-in-
command to the SAF, in the military junta which ousted al-Bashir, denying their existence 
outright is not likely to improve their willingness to negotiate. The moderator summed it up 
well, saying “if you don’t know who your enemy is, who is there to make peace with?” The 
RSF doesn’t need to be legitimized, but they need to be recognized as an actor, in order to 
have parties which can come to the negotiation table and represent both sides. 
2. The complexities of secondary/tertiary actors in negotiation  
One of the main bodies working towards a humanitarian ceaseﬁre or negotiated end to this 
war is “The Quad” made up of the US, Egypt, UAE, and Sudan. While these parties express 
that they’re aiming to end violence, they each have their own individual interests in the 
region. Except for the US, these actors have each taken sides and have been supporting 
either the RSF (UAE) or SAF (Egypt, Saudi Arabia) throughout the war. These preferences 
limit either side’s ability to be neutral in negotiation. They’ve created an environment where 
their opposition may be less willing to trust the negotiators to whom they aren’t friendly. PM 
Idris expressed an unwillingness to negotiate with the UAE while they continued to supply 
weaponry to the RSF and it’s likely that such apprehension could be extrapolated to the 
RSF’s view of the SAF’s supporters. Hence, the US will need to play an integral role in 
mediating this conﬂict, as a neutral tertiary stakeholder which has strong diplomatic 
relations with secondary parties on both sides of this conﬂict. 
3. The extent of the humanitarian crisis  
The humanitarian crisis in Sudan is far from being resolved and has only been exacerbated 
by the RSF’s violent takeover of El Fasher in October 2025. Extreme violence has been 
committed by both sides in this conﬂict, with the US determining that the RSF committed 
genocide in El Fasher as well as recognizing war crimes committed by the SAF. British 
Foreign Secretary Yvonne Cooper highlighted gender-based violence being committed 
against women as they make their way to refugee camps. It’s believed that a majority of 
women in these camps have experienced some type of sexual violence, as reported by a 
Sudanese psychologist who was counseling people in a camp near the border of Chad. 
Though there were only a few stories which were relayed during this panel, each one was 
harrowing. 
So, what action items came out of these discussions?  
The member of the Sudanese Youth Movement, Muhammad Rakman expressed that there 
have been a lot of conversations about Sudan over the past few years, but very little action. 
This conﬂict hasn’t experienced the same international pressure that was felt during the 
war in Gaza, there is a sense of protraction in this civil war, but it should be within our 
power to end it. He reiterated the importance of a humanitarian ceaseﬁre and the necessity 
of aid, which has been struggling to ﬁnd its way to civilians. There is a sense that one of the 
numerous plans which have been proposed needs to be acted upon in a more concrete 
manner. The ideas have been presented, from here they should be modiﬁed as the 
negotiation process progresses. 
The ﬁrst step is to bring the parties to the table. 
 
 